---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst,ipynb
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.4
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

```{code-cell} ipython3
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import scipy.stats as stats
plt.style.use('fivethirtyeight')

from numpy.random import default_rng
```

# HW_02

## Calculating and reporting $\pi$

Calculate your own value of $\pi$ using the random x- and y-coordinates. You need to report your findings to other engineers in your field. You should explain _why_ and _how_ you are calculating $\pi$, then describe the data with at least one plot. You can use more if it helps to explain the process or a point you are trying to make, here are some examples from our first $\pi$ calculation.

```{code-cell} ipython3
rng = default_rng(340)
plt.figure()

ax1 = plt.subplot(2, 2, (1, 2))
for N in range(500,5001, 500):
    trials = 500
    pi_trial = np.zeros(trials)
    for i in range(trials):
        x = rng.random(N)
        y = rng.random(N)

        r = x**2 + y**2

        pi_trial[i] = np.sum(r < 1**2)/N*4

    mean_pi = np.mean(pi_trial)
    std_pi = np.std(pi_trial)

    ax1.plot(N*np.ones(trials), pi_trial, 'ko', alpha = 0.1)
plt.title(r'Value of $\pi=${:1.3f}$\pm${:1.3f}'.format(mean_pi, std_pi));
plt.xlabel('Trials');
plt.ylabel('Frequency');
ax2 = plt.subplot(2, 2, 3)
ax2.hist(pi_trial, 20, density=True)


x = np.linspace(3, 3.3)
pi_pdf = stats.norm.pdf(x, loc = mean_pi, scale = std_pi)
ax2.plot(x, pi_pdf)
plt.xlabel('Distribution');
plt.ylabel('Frequency');

ax3 = plt.subplot(2, 2, 4)
ax3.boxplot(pi_trial, vert=False);
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
ax1 = plt.subplot(1, 1, 1)
for N in range(500,5001, 500):
    trials = 500
    pi_trial = np.zeros(trials)
    for i in range(trials):
        x = rng.random(N)
        y = rng.random(N)

        r = x**2 + y**2

        pi_trial[i] = np.sum(r < 1**2)/N*4

    mean_pi = np.mean(pi_trial)
    std_pi = np.std(pi_trial)
    plt.plot(N*np.ones(trials), pi_trial, 'ko', alpha = 0.1)
plt.xlabel('Trials');
plt.ylabel('Frequency');
plt.title(r'Value of $\pi=${:1.3f}$\pm${:1.3f}'.format(mean_pi, std_pi));
```

## Some points to consider in your report

- $\pi$ is not a random variable, but the probability that you land in a circle vs a square if your coordinates are x = 0-r and y = 0-r is $\frac{A_{circle}}{A_{square}} = \frac{\pi r^2}{4r^2} = \frac{\pi}{4}$.
- When is the mean "close enough" to $\pi$?
- What do the tails of the calculated $\pi$ values tell us about the prediction?
- What else do you notice in your analysis?

$\pi$ is not a random variable. $\pi$ is the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter. 
> **Cooper**: What is a different way to _measure_ or _calculate_ pi?
In this report, I calculatue $\pi$ using Monte Carlo methods.
~The Monte Carlo method, used random sampling to estimate $\pi$.~
> **Cooper**: You're saying the same thing here e.g. I calculated pi with MC. 

## Methods
Using Monte Carlo methods, random points along the x and y axis are generated between 0 and 1. 
The points input in equation x^2 + y^2, to calculate the radius. 
If the radius is greater than 1, the point is outside of the circle. 
If the radius is less than 1, the point is inside of the circle. 
The ratio of the number of points inside the circle to the total number of points is then multiplied by 4. 
This gives an estimate of $\pi$. 
This process is completed using two trials in this experiment. 
> **Cooper**: I prefer first-person writing for these experiments/calculations. Because the "inputs" can't do anything, but you as the researcher _are_ creating random points and processing results. 
A random number is determine in the first experiment and 500 trials are used in the range of 500-5000. 
> **Cooper**: I think you're referring to 500 trials with 500-5,000 x- and y-locations. 

## Results
~The mean and standard deviation are calculated.~ The value of $\pi$ is calculated to be 3.143 +- 0.024 _with 500 trials of 5000 x- and y-locations_. 
~A dot plot is created to demonstrate the relationship between trial and frequency.~ 
The scatter plot shows that as the number of x- and y-locations increased, the range of pi values converged to the expected 3.1415...
> **Cooper**: You should point out _why_ the dot plot is included, not _it was created_.
The ~bar graph~ (histogram?) shows the normal distribution of calculated pi values for the x500 trials of 5000 x- and y-locations.  
~A bar graph is created to demonstate the calculated value of $\pi$ in each trial to the frequency of each $\pi$ value.~
pi = 3.14 was the mean and highest frequency result in the histogram. 
~A boxplot was created to demonstate the range of the calculated $\pi$ values.~
~The graph shows that the range of $\pi$ values was 3.12-3.16 with 3.14 as the average $\pi$ value.~
> **Cooper**: You reported this in the first sentence. 
A second experiment was completed using the same range and number of trials.
> This is another **Methods** sentence
The value of $\pi$ is calculated to be 3.141 +- 0.023. The experiments yielded different results despite having the same range and number of trials. 
This demonstrates that $\pi$ is not a random variable but a probability of a point lying in a circle vs a square. 
Additionally, it was observed that as the number of trials increased, $\pi$ reached its assumed value.
> **Cooper**: stick to _active_ voice e.g. "Pi converged to 3.1415... as I generated more x- and y-locations. 
```{code-cell} ipython3

```
